
                          LPJ-GUESS 4.1 Release Notes
                          ===========================

These are the most important changes you'll notice when switching from 
LPJ-GUESS 4.0 to 4.1. Apart from this, numerous bugfixes, adjustments 
and technical improvements have been made. For a full history, refer 
to the Subversion history.

* Nitrogen transformations
  A more detailed formulation of soil nitrogen processes within the soil. 
  NH4 and NO3 are now modelled explicitly together with the release of
  nitrogen trace gases.
  - Nitrogen leaching is now simulated for NO3 only. Due to this, the
    simulated N-leaching was reduced substantially, which prompted for 
    a change in how leaching was calculated in the model (added to trunk
    in an earlier separate commit r8182 "Reintegrated V4.1-RETUNED 
    PARAMETERS").
  - Possibility to read manure fraction of total nitrogen addition from
    an external file. 
  - Two more files with N fluxes from the soil and N pools in the soil 
    were added. 
    Also added in this version are two more columns in seasonality.out: 
    GDD5 (growing degree days above 5degC) and tcmin_20 (minimum 
    temperature for the coldest month); these make it possible to evaluate 
    the establishment rules. The seasonality file is now also output
     whether the runlanduse switch in the ins-file is set to true or false. 
* BLAZE & SIMFIRE
  The wildfire model BLAZE (BLAZe induced land-atmosphere flux Estimator, 
  including the burned area simulator SIMFIRE) for computing burned area 
  on a daily basis and computing the fluxes between live biomass and 
  litter pools and the atmosphere for C and N. 
  BLAZE/SIMFIRE requires the new weather generator GWGEN (described below),
  and the following additional inputs:
  - new meteorological variables: relative humidity (or specific humidity 
    and pressure) and 10m horizontal windspeed,
  - the fast-archive SimfireInput.bin containing the HYDE 3.1 global 
    population dataset and monthly global fire-climatology.
* The Global WeatherGENerator (GWGEN, Sommer and Kaplan 2017) has replaced the 
  existing simple weather generator (INTERP) as standard. It produces daily
  values from monthly input of: mean temperature, daily temperature range,
  precipitation, solar downward short-wave radiation, 10m wind, relative 
  humidity (the two latter are new in version 4.1).
  - The old generator is still included in the model, and can be chosen by 
    setting the instruction file parameter 'weathergenerator' to 'INTERP'.
  - In the LPJ-GUESS Windows graphical shell, the demo and getclim input 
    models run with the old fire model GLOBFIRM only, not BLAZE, because of
    the additional inputs that BLAZE and SIMFIRE require (see BLAZE/SIMFIRE
    above).
* Soil input
 -  New soil input module, which reads more detailed soil properties from 
    textfile via the new soilinput module, instead of from the soil-code 
    lookup table. This makes obsolete the input of soil code from function
    searchcru(). If you are using CRU-input input module, then the soil 
    input needs to be on the same resolution as the CRU-NCEP files.
* Updates to soil temperature and hydrology calculations
  - Soil class - introduced to store soil temperature and water content 
    (wcont variable) in 15 layers of 10 cm depth.
  - Soil temperature - numerical calculation that used includes phase 
    change,     with explicit active layer depths. Soil water below the 
    wilting point can be frozen. The calculations use five hydrologically 
    inactive padding layers below the 15 soil layers to bring the total 
    soil depth to 49.5m. The numerical algorithm largely follows Wania 
    et al. (2009a).
  - Soil properties - each layer's physical properties (thermal, hydraulic,
    porosity) can be scaled between mineral and organic by setting 
    iforganicsoilproperties  to 1 in the .ins files. It is set to 0 
    by default.
  - Snow – a simple, fixed-density multilayer snow scheme is used in 
    the soil temperature calculations. It tends to results in higher 
    winter soil temperatures compared to the previous snowpack scheme.
  - Hydrology – we use the same algorithm as Gerten et al. (2004) but 
    updated to take into account the 15 soil layers. The hydrology 
    routine is no longer a function. Instead, we now update the patch 
    hydrology by calling a new hydrology class member function in the 
    Soil class.
  - The Peatland gridcell fraction is used if ifpeatland set to 1 in 
    landcover.ins and a Peatland land use file column exists. 
  - For the main references, please see commenting in soil.cpp and 
    soilmethane.cpp.
  - The implementations of member functions  of the class Soil have 
    been moved from guess.cpp to soil.cpp. The declarations of these 
    class member functions  and of Soil member variables are however 
    still retained in guess.h in order to keep important classes in 
    guess.h. The file soil.h contains only definitions of constants.
* High-latitude peatlands: hydrology and PFTs
  - High latitude PFTs - tall and short shrubs (evergreen and 
    deciduous), and low tundra PFTs, follow Wolf et al. (2008).
  - High latitude peatlands - follow the same hydrology as described in 
    Wania et al. (2009a, 2009b). Water table fluctuates in the acrotelm 
    (top 30cm) and the bottom 1.2m is assumed to be saturated.
  - High latitude peatland PFTs - graminoids, mosses and low shrubs 
    (evergreen and deciduous), with inundation and water table 
    restrictions on their productivity following Wania et al. (2009b),
    and sent to the photosynthesis routine in the PhotosynthesisStresses 
    structure (see further below).
  - Note that some of the BNS (e.g. Larch spp.) PFT parameter values 
    differ slightly in arctic.ins and global.ins. In particular:
    phengdd5ramp 50    ! global.ins has 100
    root_beta 0.938    ! global.ins has 0.982    
    greff_min 0.06     ! global.ins has 0.09. 0.06 is the intermediate_shade_tolerant value
    These changes were needed for a reasonable representation of BNS 
    in competition with the high-latitude PFTs in arctic.ins, such as 
    shrubs. They favour BNS by accelerating leaf phenology development 
    in spring, by concentrating roots in the unfrozen surface layers
    of the soil, and by reducing mortality slightly when growth 
    efficiency is low.	
* Methane dynamics
  - High latitude methane emission fluxes and pathways follow Wania 
    et al. (2010).
  - Other methane emission fluxes, e.g. tropical, follow Spahni et 
    al. (2011) and are calculated using a simple scaling of 
    heterotrophic respiration.
  - Global wetlands - two new wetland grass PFTs were added.
* Retuned parameters
  For LPJ-GUESS version 4.1, a parameterisation was performed. The aim 
  of the calibration was to better represent biome distributions and shifts 
  as well as global values of e.g. NPP, NEE and fire emissions. Also 
  N-leaching and N2O emissions were considered in the parameterisation, 
  as well as fire and arctic-PFT distributions and productivity and CH4 
  emissions.
  - Instruction-file pft parameter greff_min of IBS was changed from 
    0.08 to 0.135.
  - No tuning was performed for PFT's in the separate European PFT 
    instruction file (europe.ins). This will be done at a later stage. 
    However, greff_min of Bet_pen and Bet_pub in europe.ins was changed
    to be consistent with the change of IBS greff_min in global.ins.
  - The default number of patches in the instruction file for global PFTs   
    has been increased to 15 patches as a minimum recommendation. Users 
    can change to as low as 5 patches to reduce run time, but should be 
    aware that biome distributions will be affected to some degree. In 
    particular, fire fluxes computed by BLAZE will change considerably 
    when using 5 patches instead of 15 or more.
* Improvements for landcover/land-use change
  - New correction method for inconsistencies between net land cover  
    fraction and gross transition input.
  - Stand-specific output file names now include the name of the 
    stand type instead of land cover type. 
  - Improvement of land cover area fraction balance. Area shuffling 
    between stand type within a landcover type is now avoided when 
    possible; land-cover change is suppressed until soil pools have  
    been resolved during spinup; 
  - Direct use of landcover.ins without using crop.ins is now enabled.
* Use of LPJ-GUESS version 4.1 to explore CO2 fertilisation
  impacts on crop yields is not recommended. At present, yields increase 
  by an unrealistically high level across all CFTs, which far exceeds 
  results reported in Olin et al., 2015. Work is in progress to solve 
  this issue and a patch may be provided in due course.
* Monoterpene speciations
  Speciated monoterpenes are now calculated, where the monoterpene storage 
  fraction now depends on monoterpene species. Nine different monoterpene 
  species are considered which are merged in two groups: endocyclic (TM1) 
  and the rest (TM2); over Europe, only values for these 2 groups are 
  available. 
* New benchmarks
  The new enchmarks panarctic, soil_temperature, wetland_global, 
  and wetland_sites:
  - panarctic: is for a domain north of 60N and should be used with 
    arctic.ins.
    Purpose: to assess high latitude PFT distributions and active layer 
    depth distributions.
  - soil_temperature: site runs for a limited number of cells with 
    available soil temperature observations.
    Purpose: to assess seasonal soil temperature performance.
  - wetland_global: global simulation of wetland fluxes and vegetation
    Purpose: to assess global CH4 emissions as well as CH4 emissions
    from regional hotspots.
  - wetland_sites: site simulations of wetland fluxes and vegetation.
    Purpose: to evaluate against observed CH4 emissions.
  The new benchmark fluxnet replaces the benchmarks euroflux and 
  euroflux_globalpfts: sites, of at least 10 years of observations, 
  were selected from the global Fluxnet gridlist. Fluxnet input files 
  need to be supplied and pointed to by the pre-existing instruction 
  file parameter "flux_dir". 
  Biomass output, as well as fire-related benchmark output and nitrogen-
  transformation output, has been added to the crop_global benchmark.
  In several of the benchmarks, paths to reference data need to be 
  provided in the postprocess.sh script.
* Daily climate has been added as an output table. Enable output by 
  adding parameter file_daily_climate in e.g. global.ins.
  Seasonality.out is now a standard output file.             
* Updates to  photosynthesis() function header to receive the new 
  structs PhotosynthesisEnvironment and PhotosynthesisStresses. Some 
  of the photosynthesis() function parameters were moved into these 
  new structs. See the function comment in the code to see to which 
  struct each parameter was moved.
* Conditionals for function calls to features that are switched on/off 
  by instruction file parameters (e.g. land cover and crop) have been 
  moved from framework to the functions themselves.
* NetCDF input: a few functions for gridlists were added, as well as a 
  warning message from CMake if it does not find the NetCDF library.
* CMake minimum version in CMakeLists.txt has been changed to 3.5.2 
  (compatible back to 2.8.12).
* LPJ-GUESS no longer supports 32 bit compilation. 64-bit (x64) 
  compilation is required. (N.B. The same is true for the LPJ-GUESS 
  graphical shell for MS Windows: x64 compilation of the model as a 
  Windows dynamic-link library (DLL) is required since v4.0). See 
  guessdoc.pdf for details.
* The default standard submit script for parallel jobs (simba.tmpl) 
  has changed from PBS/Torque to SLURM. A submit script for PBS/Torque 
  is no longer actively maintained, and no longer provided as part of 
  the LPJ-GUESS package. A legacy submit script for PBS/Torque can be 
  found in the Release 4.0 package (old-version simba.tmpl).  

For detailed information of use of the new features, see the attached 
reference documentation.

Enquiries to Johan.Nord@nateko.lu.se.

Further information available at
http://web.nateko.lu.se/lpj-guess


